**STA-145-Final-Project**

My replication package for my 145 final project. I gathered data on the members of the House of Representatives and anayzed their age, and their leadership positon. I sought to figure out if there was a relationship between member's of the House's age, and wethere they hold a leadership position or not. 
_____________________

**Instructions** 

To access and utilize the script, open the "STA145-Eusticbq" file, which contains the code for my project. To access the dataset, open the "UPDATED FINAL PROJ DATASET - Eusticb1_project.R" file.
_____________________

**Data**

The data that was used for this project was the ages of the members o the house, as well as their leadership role, and I got this information from the US.House's main website. I wrote down their ages, then calculated the mean, and SD, and compared that to the leadership positions. 
_____________________

**Operationalization**

For this study, two primary variables were selected: age and leadership role of members of the U.S. House of Representatives. Age is determined as the number of years a House member has lived at the time of data collection. This variable is operationalized as a continuous variable, measured in years. Data on age were collected from official congressional biographical records, taken from this website: https://fiscalnote.com/blog/how-old-118th-congress.  Age was chosen for this study due to previous research that suggests that experience may influence the likelihood of holding a leadership position, and the strong correlation between age and experience. The ages of House members ranged from 28 to 88 years, with a mean of approximately 57 years, which indicates a fairly broad distribution. 

The second variable selected was leadership role, which refers to the formal leadership positions held by members within the House of Representatives. This variable is operationalized as an ordinal categorical variable, coded numerically, showing the increasing levels of leadership responsibility: 0 = No leadership role; 1 = Speaker or Minority/Majority Leader; 2 = Committee Chair; 3 = Whip; 4 = Other leadership roles (as applicable). These codes were derived from official congressional records on leadership listings. An ordinal scale was used as leadership positions in the house do have a form of hierarchy based on how much influence/power that position holds. Looking at descriptive stats, there is an unequal distribution of power, with few members in high leadership positions. However, this is normal as there are only few positions to be had. 

**Results**: 
In the appendix found below, figure 2 displays the distributions of age across leadership roles in the US House of Representatives, which shows a positive relationship between age and leadership status. Non-leading members (coded 0, see figure 1 in appendix) has a median age extremely close to the sample mean of around 56.98, while members holding a leadership role have exhibited higher overall median ages. For an example, looking at all past and the current Speaker (coded as 2) does show a median close to 58 years old, but extends noticeable into the older ages, as high as 80 years. As well, the box plot shows that it is unlikely a member younger than 40 would receive a leadership position.Particularly, it’s shown that leadership roles that hold the greatest institutional authority appear to be concentrated around older members. Although a formal significance test was not conducted, there is a visible separation among the medians, and there is a more narrow interquartile range among the higher ranked positions. This implies that age can be associated with leadership status, though nothing is concrete. 
	Throughout the study several assumptions arose and were analyzed. Independence was established as each House member appears only once, and represents a unique observation unit in the dataset. As well, normality was accepted. While the large sample for non-leaders (n=350) does support the central limit theorem, the leadership categories holding smaller sample sizes makes it difficult to conform their age distributions to a normal curve. The homogeneity of the variances however appear questionable, as the box plot shows substantial differences in the spread between groups. For example, the Speaker category shows a very wide variety of ages compared to Whips, who display a narrower distribution. This suggests that there are unusual variances. Due to this, the assumptions are not fully satisfied. 
**Discussion**: 
 The results of this test indicate that older members in the House of Representatives are more likely to hold formal leadership roles. This suggests that age, and by extension, seniority, play a sustainable role in the distribution of political power. This pattern has broader implications for representation, as previously mentioned, leadership positions hold massive influence over which politics advance, and what priorities are emphasized. If older legislators disproportionately occupy these roles, the legislative agenda is going to reflect interests and worldviews of the older generations, which is something that we have seen looking at America’s history. 
	There is a noticeable limitation in this study, which is the imbalance of group sizes across the leadership categories. Non-leaders make up the vast majority of the sample (n = 350), roles such as Speaker, Whip, and Majority/Minority Leader have extremely small sample sizes, which limits the reliability of comparisons. An improvement to make in the future would either be to expand the data set to increase the number of leadership cases. 
Conducting this research provided an opportunity to explore how demographic factors have shaped political power, as well as applying statistical tools to a real world question. Overall, this study highlights both the value and challenges of analyzing both social and political institutions through data, and the complexities of analyzing social and political institutions through data. Building and interpreting the visualizations, assessing assumptions and contextualizing results can and will strengthen a person's understanding of data, and in particular for this study, how quantitative methods can uncover patterns not easily visible. 


